---
bibliography:
- 'ref\_teaching.bib'
---

Probability
===========

For the convenience of online teaching in the fall semester of 2020, the
layout is modified with wide margins and line space for note taking.

Introduction
------------

With the advent of big data, computer scientists have come up with a
plethora of new algorithms that are aimed at revealing patterns from
data. *Machine learning* and *artificial intelligence* become buzz words
that attract public attention. They defeated best human Go players,
automated manufacturers, powered self-driving vehicles, recognized human
faces, and recommended online purchases. Some of these industrial
successes are based on statistical theory, and statistical theory is
based on probability theory. Although this probabilistic approach is not
the only perspective to understand the behavior of machine learning and
artificial intelligence, it offers one of the most promising paradigms
to rationalize existing algorithms and engineer new ones.

Economics has been an empirical social science since Adam Smith
(1723--1790). Many numerical observations and anecdotes were scattered
in his *Wealth of Nations* published in 1776. Ragnar Frisch (1895--1973)
and Jan Tinbergen (1903\--1994), two pioneer econometricians, were
awarded in 1969 the first Nobel Prize in economics. Econometrics
provides quantitative insights about economic data. It flourishes in
real-world management practices, from households and firms up to
governance at the global level. Today, the big data revolution is
pumping fresh energy into research and exercises of econometric methods.
The mathematical foundation of econometric theory is built on
probability theory as well.

Axiomatic Probability
---------------------

Human beings are awed by uncertainty in daily life. In the old days,
Egyptians consulted oracles, Hebrews inquired prophets, and Chinese
counted on diviners to interpret tortoise shell or bone cracks.
Fortunetellers are abundant in today's Hong Kong.

Probability theory is a philosophy about uncertainty. Over centuries,
mathematicians strove to contribute to the understanding of randomness.
As measure theory matured in the early 20th century, Andrey Kolmogorov
(1903-1987) built the edifice of modern probability theory in his
monograph published in 1933. The formal mathematical language is a
system that allows rigorous explorations which have made fruitful
advancements, and is now widely accepted in academic and industrial
research.

In this lecture, we will briefly introduce the axiomatic probability
theory along with familiar results covered in undergraduate *probability
and statistics*. This lecture note is at the level

-   Hansen (2020): Introduction to Econometrics, or

-   Stachurski (2016): A Primer in Econometric Theory, or

-   Casella and Berger (2002): Statistical Inference (second edition)

Interested readers may want to read this textbook for more examples.

### Probability Space

A *sample space* $\Omega$ is a collection of all possible outcomes. It
is a set of things. An *event* $A$ is a subset of $\Omega$. It is
something of interest on the sample space. A $\sigma$-*field*, denoted
by $\mathcal{F}$, is a collection of events such that

1.  $\emptyset\in\mathcal{F}$;

2.  if an event $A\in\mathcal{F}$, then $A^{c}\in\mathcal{F}$;

3.  if $A_{i}\in\mathcal{F}$ for $i\in\mathbb{N}$, then
    $\bigcup_{i\in\mathbb{N}}A_{i}\in\mathcal{F}$.

Implications: (a) Since $\Omega=\emptyset^{c}\in\mathcal{F}$, we have
$\Omega\in\mathcal{F}$. (b) If $A_{i}\in\mathcal{F}$ for
$i\in\mathbb{N}$, then $A_{i}^{c}\in\mathcal{F}$ for $i\in\mathbb{N}$.
Thus, if $\bigcup_{i\in\mathbb{N}}A_{i}^{c}\in\mathcal{F}$ , then
$\bigcap_{i\in\mathbb{N}}A_{i}=(\bigcup_{i\in\mathbb{N}}A_{i}^{c})^{c}\in\mathcal{F}$.

Intuitively, a $\sigma$-field is a pool which is closed for countable
sets to conduct union, difference, and intersection operations. These
are algebraic operations of sets. $\sigma$-field is also called
$\sigma$-algebra.

Let $\Omega=\{1,2,3,4,5,6\}$. Some examples of $\sigma$-*fields* include

-   $\mathcal{F}_{1}=\{\emptyset,\{1,2,3\},\{4,5,6\},\Omega\}$;

-   $\mathcal{F}_{2}=\{\emptyset,\{1,3\},\{2,4,5,6\},\Omega\}$.

-   Counterexample:
    $\mathcal{F}_{3}=\{\emptyset,\{1,2\},\{4,6\},\Omega\}$ is not a
    $\sigma$-*field* since *$\{1,2,4,6\}=\{1,2\}\bigcup\{4,6\}$* does
    not belong to $\mathcal{F}_{3}$.

The $\sigma$-field can be viewed as a well-organized structure built on
the ground of the sample space. The pair
$\left(\Omega,\mathcal{F}\right)$ is called a *measure space*.

Let $\mathcal{G}=\{B_{1},B_{2},\ldots\}$ be an arbitrary collection of
sets, not necessarily a $\sigma$-field. We say $\mathcal{F}$ is the
smallest $\sigma$-field generated by $\mathcal{G}$ if
$\mathcal{G}\subseteq\mathcal{F}$, and
$\mathcal{F}\subseteq\mathcal{\tilde{F}}$ for any $\mathcal{\tilde{F}}$
such that $\mathcal{G}\subseteq\mathcal{\tilde{F}}$. A *Borel
$\sigma$-field* $\mathcal{R}$ is the smallest $\sigma$-field generated
by the open sets on the real line $\mathbb{R}$.

Let $\Omega=\{1,2,3,4,5,6\}$ and $A=\{\{1\},\{1,3\}\}$. Then the
smallest $\sigma$-field generated by $A$ is
$$\sigma(A)=\{\emptyset,\{1\},\{1,3\},\{3\},\{2,4,5,6\},\{2,3,4,5,6\},\{1,2,4,5,6\},\Omega\}.$$

A function $\mu:(\Omega,\mathcal{F})\mapsto\left[0,\infty\right]$ is
called a *measure* if it satisfies

1.  (positiveness) $\mu\left(A\right)\geq0$ for all $A\in\mathcal{F}$;

2.  (countable additivity) if $A_{i}\in\mathcal{F}$, $i\in\mathbb{N}$,
    are mutually disjoint, then
    $$\mu\left(\bigcup_{i\in\mathbb{N}}A_{i}\right)=\sum_{i\in\mathbb{N}}\mu\left(A_{i}\right).$$

Measure can be understand as weight or length. In particular, we call
$\mu$ a *probability measure* if $\mu\left(\Omega\right)=1$. A
probability measure is often denoted as $P$. The triple
$\left(\Omega,\mathcal{F},P\right)$ is called a *probability space*.

So far we have answered the question: "What is a mathematically
well-defined probability?", but we have not yet answered "How to assign
the probability?" There are two major schools of thinking on probability
assignment. One is *frequentist*, who considers probability as the
average chance of occurrence if a large number of experiments are
carried out. The other is *Bayesian*, who deems probability as a
subjective brief. The principles of these two schools are largely
incompatible, while each school has merits and difficulties, which will
be elaborated when discussing hypothesis testing.

### Random Variable

The terminology *random variable* is a historic relic which belies its
modern definition of a deterministic mapping. It is a link between two
measurable spaces such that any event in the $\sigma$-field installed on
the range can be traced back to an event in the $\sigma$-field installed
on the domain.

Formally, a function $X:\Omega\mapsto\mathbb{R}$ is
$\left(\Omega,\mathcal{F}\right)\backslash\left(\mathbb{R},\mathcal{R}\right)$
*measurable* if
$$X^{-1}\left(B\right)=\left\{ \omega\in\Omega:X\left(\omega\right)\in B\right\} \in\mathcal{F}$$
for any $B\in\mathcal{R}.$ *Random variable* is an alternative, and
somewhat romantic, name for a measurable function. The *$\sigma$-field
generated by the random variable* $X$ is defined as
$\sigma\left(X\right)=\left\{ X^{-1}\left(B\right):B\in\mathcal{R}\right\}$.

We say a measurable is a *discrete random variable* if the set
$\left\{ X\left(\omega\right):\omega\in\Omega\right\}$ is finite or
countable. We say it is a *continuous random variable* if the set
$\left\{ X\left(\omega\right):\omega\in\Omega\right\}$ is uncountable.

A measurable function connects two measurable spaces. No probability is
involved in its definition yet. While if a probability measure $P$ is
installed on $(\Omega,\mathcal{F})$, the measurable function $X$ will
induce a probability measure on $(\mathbb{R},\mathcal{R})$. It is easy
to verify that $P_{X}:(\mathbb{R},\mathcal{R})\mapsto\left[0,1\right]$
is also a probability measure if defined as
$$P_{X}\left(B\right)=P\left(X^{-1}\left(B\right)\right)$$ for any
$B\in\mathcal{R}$. This $P_{X}$ is called the probability measure
*induced* by the measurable function $X$. The induced probability
measure $P_{X}$ is an offspring of the parent probability measure $P$
though the channel of $X$.

### Distribution Function

We go back to some terms that we have learned in a undergraduate
probability course. A *(cumulative) distribution function*
$F:\mathbb{R}\mapsto[0,1]$ is defined as
$$F\left(x\right)=P\left(X\leq x\right)=P\left(\{X\leq x\}\right)=P\left(\left\{ \omega\in\Omega:X\left(\omega\right)\leq x\right\} \right).$$
It is often abbreviated as CDF, and it has the following properties.

1.  $\lim_{x\to-\infty}F\left(x\right)=0$,

2.  $\lim_{x\to\infty}F\left(x\right)=1$,

3.  non-decreasing,

4.  right-continuous $\lim_{y\to x^{+}}F\left(y\right)=F\left(x\right).$

Draw the CDF of a binary distribution; that is, $X=1$ with probability
$p\in\left(0,1\right)$ and $X=0$ with probability $1-p$.

For continuous distribution, if there exists a function $f$ such that
for all $x$,
$$F\left(x\right)=\int_{-\infty}^{x}f\left(y\right)\mathrm{d}y,$$ then
$f$ is called the *probability density function* of $X$, often
abbreviated as PDF. It is easy to show that $f\left(x\right)\geq0$ and
$\int_{a}^{b}f\left(x\right)dx=F\left(b\right)-F\left(a\right)$.

We have learned many parametric distributions like the binary
distribution, the Poisson distribution, the uniform distribution, the
exponential distribution, the normal distribution, $\chi^{2}$, $t$, $F$
distributions and so on. They are parametric distributions, meaning that
the CDF or PDF can be completely characterized by very few parameters.

Expected Value
--------------

### Integration

Integration is one of the most fundamental operations in mathematical
analysis. We have studied Riemann's integral in the undergraduate
calculus. Riemann's integral is intuitive, but Lebesgue integral is a
more general approach to defining integration. Lebesgue integral is
constructed by the following steps. $X$ is called a *simple function* on
a measurable space $\left(\Omega,\mathcal{F}\right)$ if
$X=\sum_{i}a_{i}\cdot1\left\{ A_{i}\right\}$ and this summation is
finite, where $a_{i}\in\mathbb{R}$ and
$\{A_{i}\in\mathcal{F}\}_{i\in\mathbb{N}}$ is a partition of $\Omega$. A
simple function is measurable.

1.  Let $\left(\Omega,\mathcal{F},\mu\right)$ be a measure space. The
    integral of the simple function $X$ with respect to $\mu$ is
    $$\int X\mathrm{d}\mu=\sum_{i}a_{i}\mu\left(A_{i}\right).$$ Unlike
    the Rieman integral, this definition of integration does not
    partition the domain into splines of equal length. Instead, it
    tracks the distinctive values of the function and the corresponding
    measure.

2.  Let $X$ be a non-negative measurable function. The integral of $X$
    with respect to $\mu$ is
    $$\int X\mathrm{d}\mu=\sup\left\{ \int Y\mathrm{d}\mu:0\leq Y\leq X,\text{ }Y\text{ is simple}\right\} .$$

3.  Let $X$ be a measurable function. Define
    $X^{+}=\max\left\{ X,0\right\}$ and
    $X^{-}=-\min\left\{ X,0\right\}$. Both $X^{+}$ and $X^{-}$ are
    non-negative functions. The integral of $X$ with respect to $\mu$ is
    $$\int X\mathrm{d}\mu=\int X^{+}\mathrm{d}\mu-\int X^{-}\mathrm{d}\mu.$$

The Step 1 above defines the integral of a simple function. Step 2
defines the integral of a non-negative function as the approximation of
steps functions from below. Step 3 defines the integral of a general
function as the difference of the integral of two non-negative parts.

The integrand that highlights the difference between the Lebesgue
integral and Riemann integral is the Dirichelet function on the unit
interval $1\left\{ x\in\mathbb{Q}\cap[0,1]\right\}$. It is not
Riemann-integrable whereas its Lebesgue integral. is well defined and
$\int1\left\{ x\in\mathbb{Q}\cap[0,1]\right\} dx=0$.

If the measure $\mu$ is a probability measure $P$, then the integral
$\int X\mathrm{d}P$ is called the *expected value,* or *expectation,* of
$X$. We often use the notation $E\left[X\right]$, instead of
$\int X\mathrm{d}P$, for convenience.

Expectation provides the average of a random variable, despite that we
cannot foresee the realization of a random variable in a particular
trial (otherwise the study of uncertainty is trivial). In the
frequentist's view, the expectation is the average outcome if we carry
out a large number of independent trials.

If we know the probability mass function of a discrete random variable,
its expectation is calculated as
$E\left[X\right]=\sum_{x}xP\left(X=x\right)$, which is the integral of a
simple function. If a continuous random variable has a PDF $f(x)$, its
expectation can be computed as
$E\left[X\right]=\int xf\left(x\right)\mathrm{d}x$. These two
expressions are unified as $E[X]=\int X\mathrm{d}P$ by the Lebesgue
integral.

### Properties of Expectations

Here are some properties of mathematical expectations.

-   The probability of an event $A$ is the expectation of an indicator
    function.
    $E\left[1\left\{ A\right\} \right]=1\times P(A)+0\times P(A^{c})=P\left(A\right)$.

-   $E\left[X^{r}\right]$ is call the $r$-moment of $X$. The *mean* of a
    random variable is the first moment $\mu=E\left[X\right]$, and the
    second *centered* moment is called the *variance*
    $\mathrm{var}\left[X\right]=E\left[\left(X-\mu\right)^{2}\right]$.
    The third centered moment $E\left[\left(X-\mu\right)^{3}\right]$,
    called *skewness*, is a measurement of the symmetry of a random
    variable, and the fourth centered moment
    $E\left[\left(X-\mu\right)^{4}\right]$, called *kurtosis*, is a
    measurement of the tail thickness.

-   Moments do not always exist. For example, the mean of the Cauchy
    distribution does not exist, and the variance of the $t(2)$
    distribution does not exist.

-   $E[\cdot]$ is a linear operation. If $\phi(\cdot)$ is a linear
    function, then $E[\phi(X)]=\phi(E[X]).$

-   *Jensen's inequality* is an important fact. A function
    $\varphi(\cdot)$ is convex if
    $\varphi(ax_{1}+(1-a)x_{2})\leq a\varphi(x_{1})+(1-a)\varphi(x_{2})$
    for all $x_{1},x_{2}$ in the domain and $a\in[0,1]$. For instance,
    $x^{2}$ is a convex function. Jensen's inequality says that if
    $\varphi\left(\cdot\right)$ is a convex function, then
    $\varphi\left(E\left[X\right]\right)\leq E\left[\varphi\left(X\right)\right].$

-   *Markov inequality* is another simple but important fact. If
    $E\left[\left|X\right|^{r}\right]$ exists, then
    $P\left(\left|X\right|>\epsilon\right)\leq E\left[\left|X\right|^{r}\right]/\epsilon^{r}$
    for all $r\geq1$. *Chebyshev inequality*
    $P\left(\left|X\right|>\epsilon\right)\leq E\left[X^{2}\right]/\epsilon^{2}$
    is a special case of the Markov inequality when $r=2$.

-   The distribution of a random variable is completely characterized by
    its CDF or PDF. A moment is a function of the distribution. To back
    out the underlying distribution from moments, we need to know the
    moment-generating function (mgf) $M_{X}(t)=E[e^{tX}]$ for
    $t\in\mathbb{R}$ whenever the expectation exists. The $r$th moment
    can be computed from mgf as
    $$E[X^{r}]=\frac{\mathrm{d}^{r}M_{X}(t)}{\mathrm{d}t^{r}}\big\vert_{t=0}.$$
    Just like moments, mgf does not always exist.

Multivariate Random Variable
----------------------------

A bivariate random variable is a measurable function
$X:\Omega\mapsto\mathbb{R}^{2}$, and more generally a multivariate
random variable is a measurable function
$X:\Omega\mapsto\mathbb{R}^{n}$. We can define the *joint CDF* as
$F\left(x_{1},\ldots,x_{n}\right)=P\left(X_{1}\leq x_{1},\ldots,X_{n}\leq x_{n}\right)$.
Joint PDF is defined similarly.

It is sufficient to introduce the joint distribution, conditional
distribution and marginal distribution in the simple bivariate case, and
these definitions can be extended to multivariate distributions. Suppose
a bivariate random variable $(X,Y)$ has a joint density
$f(\cdot,\cdot)$. The *conditional density* can be roughly written as
$f\left(y|x\right)=f\left(x,y\right)/f\left(x\right)$ if we do not
formally deal with the case $f(x)=0$. The *marginal density*
$f\left(y\right)=\int f\left(x,y\right)dx$ integrates out the coordinate
that is not interested.

### Conditional Probability and Bayes' Theorem

In a probability space $(\Omega,\mathcal{F},P)$, for two events
$A_{1},A_{2}\in\mathcal{F}$ the *conditional probability* is
$$P\left(A_{1}|A_{2}\right)=\frac{P\left(A_{1}A_{2}\right)}{P\left(A_{2}\right)}$$
if $P(A_{2})>0$. In the definition of conditional probability, $A_{2}$
plays the role of the outcome space so that $P(A_{1}A_{2})$ is
standardized by the total mass $P(A_{2})$. If $P(A_{2})=0$, the
conditional probability can still be valid in some cases, but we need to
introduce the *dominance* between two measures, which we do not
elaborate here.

Since $A_{1}$ and $A_{2}$ are symmetric, we also have
$P(A_{1}A_{2})=P(A_{2}|A_{1})P(A_{1})$. It implies
$$P(A_{1}|A_{2})=\frac{P\left(A_{2}|A_{1}\right)P\left(A_{1}\right)}{P\left(A_{2}\right)}$$
This formula is the *Bayes' Theorem*.

### Independence

We say two events $A_{1}$ and $A_{2}$ are *independent* if
$P(A_{1}A_{2})=P(A_{1})P(A_{2})$. If $P(A_{2})\neq0$, it is equivalent
to $P(A_{1}|A_{2})=P(A_{1})$. In words, knowing $A_{2}$ does not change
the probability of $A_{1}$.

Regarding the independence of two random variables, $X$ and $Y$ are
*independent* if
$P\left(X\in B_{1},Y\in B_{2}\right)=P\left(X\in B_{1}\right)P\left(Y\in B_{2}\right)$
for any two Borel sets $B_{1}$ and $B_{2}$.

If $X$ and $Y$ are independent, then $E[XY]=E[X]E[Y]$. The expectation
of their product is the product of their expectations.

### Law of Iterated Expectations

Given a probability space $\left(\Omega,\mathcal{F},P\right)$, a *sub
$\sigma$-algebra* $\mathcal{G}\subseteq\mathcal{F}$ and a
$\mathcal{F}$-measurable function $Y$ with $E\left|Y\right|<\infty$, the
*conditional expectation* $E\left[Y|\mathcal{G}\right]$ is defined as a
$\mathcal{G}$-measurable function such that
$$\int_{A}Y\mathrm{d}P=\int_{A}E\left[Y|\mathcal{G}\right]\mathrm{d}P$$
for all $A\in\mathcal{G}$. Here $\mathcal{G}$ is a coarse $\sigma$-field
and $\mathcal{F}$ is a finer $\sigma$-field.

Taking $A=\Omega$, we have
$E\left[Y\right]=\int Y\mathrm{d}P=\int E\left[Y|\mathcal{G}\right]\mathrm{d}P=E\left[E\left[Y|\mathcal{G}\right]\right]$.
The *law of iterated expectation*
$$E\left[Y\right]=E\left[E\left[Y|\mathcal{G}\right]\right]$$ is a
trivial fact which follows this definition of the conditional
expectation. In the bivariate case, if the conditional density exists,
the conditional expectation can be computed as
$E\left[Y|X\right]=\int yf\left(y|X\right)\mathrm{d}y$, where the
conditioning variable
$E\left[\cdot|X\right]=E\left[\cdot|\sigma\left(X\right)\right]$ is a
concise notation for the smallest $\sigma$-field generated by $X$. The
law of iterated expectation implies
$E\left[E\left[Y|X\right]\right]=E\left[Y\right]$.

Below are some properties of conditional expectations

1.  $E\left[E\left[Y|X_{1},X_{2}\right]|X_{1}\right]=E\left[Y|X_{1}\right];$

2.  $E\left[E\left[Y|X_{1}\right]|X_{1},X_{2}\right]=E\left[Y|X_{1}\right];$

3.  $E\left[h\left(X\right)Y|X\right]=h\left(X\right)E\left[Y|X\right].$

Summary
-------

If it is your first encounter of measure theory, the new definitions
here may seem overwhelmingly abstract. A natural question is that: "I
earned high grade in my undergraduate probability and statistics; do I
really need the fancy mathematics in this lecture to do well in
econometrics?" The answer is yes and no. *No* is in the sense that if
you want to use econometric methods, instead of grasp the underlying
theory, then the axiomatic probability does not add much to your
weaponry. You can be an excellent economist or applied econometrician
without knowing measure theoretic probability. *Yes* is in the sense
that without measure theory, we cannot even formally define conditional
expectation, which will be the subject of our next lecture and is a core
concept of econometrics. Moreover, the pillars of asymptotic theory ---
law of large numbers and central limit theorem --- can only be made
accurate with this foundation. If you are aspired to work on econometric
theory, you will meet and use measure theory so often in your future
study and finally it becomes part of your muscle memory.

In this course, we try to keep a balance manner. On the one hand, many
econometrics topics can be presented with elementary mathematics.
Whenever possible, econometrics should reach wider audience with a plain
appearance, instead of intimidating people by arcane languages. On the
other hand, we introduce these concepts in this lecture and will invoke
them in the discussion of asymptotic theory later. Your investment in
advanced mathematics will not be wasted in vain.

**Historical notes:** Measure theory was established in the early 20th
century by a constellation of French/German mathematicians, represented
by Émile Borel, Henri Lebesgue, Johann Radon, etc. Generations of
Russian mathematicians such as Andrey Markov and Andrey Kolmogorov made
fundamental contributions in mathematizing seemingly abstract concepts
of uncertainty and randomness. Their names are immortalized by the Borel
set, the Lebesgue integral, the Radon measure, Markov chain,
Kolmogorov's zero--one law and many other terminologies named after
them.

Fascinating questions about probability attracted great economists.
Francis Edgeworth (1845--1926) wrote extensively on probability and
statistics. John Maynard Keynes (1883--1946) published *A Treatise on
Probability* in 1921 which mixed probability and philosophy, although
this piece of work was not as influential as his *General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money* in 1936 which later revolutionized
economics.

Today, the technology of collecting data and the processing data is
unbelievably cheaper than that 100 years ago. Unfortunately, the cost of
learning mathematics and developing mathematics has not been
significantly lowered over one century. Only a small handful of talents,
like you, enjoy the privilege and luxury to appreciate the ideas of
these great minds.

**Further reading**: @doob1996development summarized the development of
axiomatic probability in the first half of the 20th century.

` Zhentao Shi. Sep 12, 2020.`
